#LyX 1.1 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 218
\textclass article
\language english
\inputencoding latin1
\fontscheme default
\graphics default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single 
\papersize Default
\paperpackage a4
\use_geometry 0
\use_amsmath 0
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\quotes_times 2
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default

\layout Title

Readme for Umix
\layout Author

Sakari Lehtonen
\layout Date

Tue 23, 04/2002
\layout Standard


\begin_inset LatexCommand \tableofcontents{}

\end_inset 


\layout Section

What is Umix ?
\layout Standard

Umix is a program for adjusting soundcard mixers in Linux and other Unices.
 You can control your volumes, balances and recording sources flexibly from
 the command line, or with a fullscreen user interface.
 Umix currently supports Linux, OSS and dummy mixer devices.
 I designed it as an replacement for Aumix.
\layout Subsection

How to use Umix ?
\layout Standard

Read the man-page.
\layout Subsection

What does Umix mean ?
\layout Standard

Nothing particular.
 Ultimate Mixer ? Unix Mixer ? Something like that.
 Yes, I know it's a dull name.
\layout Subsection

Why another volume mixer ?
\layout Standard

I got frustrated with Aumix, and there were no other good alternatives that
 had terminal/ncurses user interfaces.
 I myself like to do all my work in a console, and at the same time I usually
 listen to mp3/nsf music, and need to adjust my soundcard volumes constantly.
 Aumix acts weird, eats too much CPU cycles etc.
 If you want to modify it in any sensible way, total rewrite would be the
 only way.
\layout Standard

\layout Section

Feedback, patches etc.
\layout Standard

Send feedback, patches, bug reports and anything related
to sakari@ionstream.fi.

\layout Subsection

Debugging
\layout Standard

If you want to debug Umix, configure it with the option 
\series bold 
--enable-debug
\series default 
.
 This will enable debugging information printed to stderr.
 If you want to enable the dummy mixer that has predefined volume levels
 and other settings, pass the 
\series bold 
\emph on 
--
\emph default 
enable-dummy
\series default 
 to configure, and use the command line option 
\series bold 
-r
\series default 
\emph on 
 dummy.
\layout Section

Legal information
\layout Standard

Copyright (C) 2002 Sakari Lehtonen <sakari@ionstream.fi>.
 This is free software; see the source for copying conditions.
 There is NO warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
 USAGE.
\the_end
