.\" $Id: umix.1,v 1.3 2003/02/09 09:35:45 sakari Exp $
.\"
.\" Manual page for umix. See README for more information.
.\" Copyright (C) 2002 Sakari Lehtonen <sakari@ionstream.fi>
.\"
.\"
.TH "UMIX" 1 "08 Jun 2002" "" "Sound Utilities"
.SH "NAME"
umix \- adjust soundcard mixers
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.B umix
.RI [ \|channel\|\ volume\| | \|left:right ]\c
.RB [ R | P ]\c
.RB [\| + | - \|]
.IR device \|]
.RB [\| \-r
.IR driver \|]
.RB [\| \-f
.IR configpath \|]
.RB [\| \-ghilqsv \|]
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.B umix
is a program for adjusting soundcard mixers.
With it you can adjust your soundcard volumes, balances and
recording sources.
It can be used flexibly from the command-line,
or from an interactive user interface.

You can save your soundcard volumes to a file, and load them
afterwards, for example when when booting the machine.

Channel names are used to specify the volume you want to
adjust. You can check what channels are supported with the 
.B -q
option. Channel names can also be shortened if they have enough
distinctive letters to identify the channel, eg. 'volume' can be 
shortened to 'vol'. If channel name is specified as
.I all
, all available channels are set to the specified value.

For each
.I channel
specified,
.I volume
is the volume you want to set, with both left
and right specified as the same, or in
.IR left : right
format.

You can also specify optional
.BR + \ or \ -
after the
.I volume
for increasing or decreasing the volume for
.BR channel ,
with amount
.IR volume .
The optional
.BR R \ or \ P
at the end of the
.I channel
argument sets the
.I channel
as a current recording source or normal play, respectively.
You can use both upper- and lowercase letters.

You can slide volumes smoothly in steps from one point to another.
The format is following:
.IR startvol , endvol , steps , delay .
Here
.I startvol
is the volume you want to slide the volume from, and
.I endvol
is the volume you want to increase or decrease in steps to. 
Optional parameter
.I steps
specifies the number of steps between the two volumes, and
.I delay
the delay between two steps. Default values for
.I steps
is 20, and 20ms for
.IR delay .
The optional
.BR + \ or \ -
have no effect when sliding volumes.

The
.I delay
can be between 0 and 5 seconds, specified in milliseconds.
Maximum value for 
.I steps 
is the difference between the starting
and destination volume, so that the minimum raise or decrease in one 
step is always 1.

All volume settings are parsed the same, so you can use sliding in your
config file too, you just have to edit the config manually.
For example the line

pcm 0,100,25,50

in your config file would slide the volume of 'pcm' from 0 to 100
in 25 steps and with a 50 ms delay when loading settings.

Umix needs read and write permissions to the mixer device. I suggest
that you create a group for this and change permissions
so that group has write and read access to the devices, then
add necessary users to that group.

.SH "OPTIONS"
.TP
.B \-q, \-\-query
Query and print all active channel volumes and stats from
all available devices. Interactive UI is not started.
.TP
.B \-l, \-\-load
Load previously saved settings from
.IR configpath .
If
.I configpath
is specified as '-', settings are loaded from
standard input. Clears the
.BR \-i
option.
.TP
.B \-s, \-\-save
Save current mixer settings to
.IR configpath .
If
.I configpath
is specified as '-', settings are printed to
standard output. Clears the
.BR \-i
option.
.TP
.BI \-f\  configpath ,\ \-\-file= configpath
Specify the file used to read and save settings.
Defaults to
.IR /etc/umixrc .
Sets the
.BR \-i
option.
.TP
.BI \-d\  device ,\ \-\-device= device
Specify the device used. Defaults to
.IR /dev/mixer .
Sets the
.BR \-i
option.
.TP
.BI \-r\  driver ,\ \-\-driver= driver
Specify the driver used. Defaults to
.IR OSS .
Sets the
.BR \-i
option.
.TP
.B \-i, \-\-interactive
Start interactive user interface after processing
non-interactive command-line options. 
.TP
.B \-g, \-\-globals
Print current global options. This is useful for finding out what
is the default device etc.
.TP
.B \-h, \-\-help
Display help and exit.
.TP
.B \-v, \-\-version
Display version information and exit.
.SH "EXAMPLES"
.TP
.B umix\ \-q
Prints all volumes of active channels and their stats.
The output should be self\-explanatory.
.TP
.BI umix\  volume\ 100 \  bass\ 88 \  treble\ 80 \  pcm\ 94
Sets the volume to 100, bass to 88,
treble to 80 and PCM to 94.
.TP
.BI umix\  vol\ 100 : 80 \  syn\ 90 : 30
Here channel names are shortened and stereo settings are used.
Sets volume`s left to 100, right to 80 and synth`s
left to 90 and right to 30.
.TP
.BI umix\  bass\ 20- \  pcm\ 20 : 10+ \  ogain\ 40 : 45-
Here volumes are incremented or decremented from their
original values. Decreases bass by 20, increases
PCM`s left by 20 and right by 10 and the last one
decreases output gain`s left by 40 and right by 45.
.TP
.BI umix\  mic\ R \  synth\ 20P \  line\ 10p-
This sets the mic as a recording source,
synth as normal play with volume 20 and line
as normal play with volume decreased by 10.
.TP
.BI umix\  pcm\ 0,60,30,25 \  vol\ 100,70 \  synth\ 50:50,25:50
Here sliding is demonstrated. The first slides pcm from 0 to 60
with 30 steps and a 25 ms delay, then slides vol from 100 to 70 with
default steps and delay and the last one slides synth from 50:50 to
25:50. 
.TP
.BI umix\ \-f \ /some/path/umixrc \ \-l
Here the config path is specified as
.I /some/path/umixrc
and settings are loaded from that file.
.TP
.BI umix\ \-d \ /dev/mixer2 \ \-f \ /somepath/umsettings
The device that is used for mixing is specified as
.IR /dev/mixer2 ,
config path is set as
.I /somepath/umsettings
and the interactive user interface is automatically
started, because.
.BR \-f \ and \ \-d
set the
.BR \-i
option.
.SH "NCURSES USER INTERFACE"
The (n)curses based user interface. Designed to be used
from a console or x-terminal.
.SS "USAGE"
On the left side is the channel menu, which consists of
channel names, stats and volumes.
On the right side is the balance menu.
The currently chosen channel is indicated with highlighting
its name and drawing arrows around the chosen menu.
You can move around with default
.BR vi / emacs / arrow \ keys.

Moving up and down selects the current channel, moving
left and right adjusts the volume or balance,
depending on which menu you are in.
.B Tab
toggles between volume and balance menus.

If the channel does not support stereo mixing
(it`s left and right values cannot differ), then a
.BR '|'
at center of the balance is drawn.
.SS "KEY BINDINGS"
.TP
.BR j \ / \ ^n \ / \ arrow\ down
Move down.
.TP
.BR k \ / \ ^p \ / \ arrow\ up
Move up.
.TP
.BR h \ / \ ^b \ / \ arrow\ left
Decrease volume / balance left.
.TP
.BR l \ / \ ^f \ / \ arrow\ right
Increase volume / balance right.
.TP
.BR ] \ / \ .
Increase volume by fifth of maximum amount.
.TP
.BR [ \ / \ ,
Decrease volume by fifth of maximum amount.
.TP
.B Tab
Toggle between volume and balance menus.
.TP
.B Space
Toggle play / record source.
.TP
.B L
Load settings.
.TP
.B S
Save settings.
.TP
.B f
Specify the config path. This presents a dialog in the lower
border. If no string is given, the path remains unchanged.
.TP
.B e
Enter channel volume manually for the current channel. 
Same rules apply as with command-line channel settings, 
so you can set balances and recording sources too.
.TP
.B n
Cycles through available mixer devices. You can see the currently
active mixer and the total number of initialized mixers in the
top border.
.TP
.B m
Mutes all those channels that are not already mute. If pressed
again, returns volumes back to the state before muting.
.TP
.B x
Excludes the current channel. Same as
.B m
but only with the current channel.
.TP
.B H
Displays the help.
.TP
.B q
Exit the program.
.TP
.B ^l
Refresh the screen.
.SH "CONFIG FILE"
The config consists of global options and mixer settings.
Global options come after the keyword
.BR [global] .
Global options are read before loading any mixer settings or
parsing command-line options. Global options are the defaults
to use if no command-line options are given.

Mixer settings come after the keyword
.BR [mixers] .
The mixer device that settings are loaded for is specified with the keyword
.BR mixer .
The string after
.BR mixer=
is the path of the mixer device. Then comes the settings
for that mixer. These are parsed like command-line options.

Comments and all other characters are ignored.

.SH "FILES"
.TP
.I /etc/umixrc
The default configuration file.
.TP
.I $HOME/.umixrc
Used as the config file if exists.
.SH "BUGS"
When used with terminals that have columns below 35, the output
is not optimal with the ncurses UI.

If the number of channels is greater than number of lines on screen, you
cannot adjust channels that exceed the number of lines in the ncurses UI 
(rare, but to be fixed soon)
.SH "AUTHOR"
Sakari Lehtonen <sakari@ionstream.fi>
